HOSTEDCP-1416: Hosted Control Planes ETCD Backup API (#1553)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/hypershift/disaster-recovery/hcp-etcd-backup-api.md

---
title: hcp-etcd-backup-api

authors:
  - "@jparrill"

reviewers:
  - "@csrwng"
  - "@enxebre"
  - "@sjenning"
  - "@derekwaynecarr"
  - "@imain"
  - "@bryan-cox"
  - "@jparrill"
  - "@muraee"
  - "@Patryk-Stefanski"
  - "@celebdor"

approvers:
  - "@csrwng"
  - "@enxebre"
  - "@sjenning"
  - "@derekwaynecarr"
  - "@imain"
  - "@bryan-cox"
  - "@jparrill"
  - "@muraee"
  - "@Patryk-Stefanski"
  - "@celebdor"

api-approvers:
  - "@csrwng"
  - "@enxebre"
  - "@sjenning"
  - "@derekwaynecarr"
  - "@imain"
  - "@bryan-cox"
  - "@jparrill"
  - "@muraee"
  - "@Patryk-Stefanski"
  - "@celebdor"

creation-date: 2024-02-01
last-updated: 2024-02-16

tracking-link:
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/HOSTEDCP-1370

see-also:
  - N/A
replaces:
  - N/A
superseded-by:
  - N/A
---

# Hosted Control Plane Etcd Backup API

## Summary
This proposal fleshes out the details for the new automated Etcd Backup API solution for Hosted Control Planes.

## Glossary
- HCP - Hosted Control Plane
- HC - Hosted Cluster
- PVC - Persistent Volume Claim
- PV - Persistent Volume

## Motivation

> Hypershift now has a small interface to perform the etcd backups using the CLI. This solution it's not fully integrated into the product and develop an API will help to make the product growth in many senses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hypershift now has a small interface to perform the etcd backups using the CLI. This solution is not fully integrated into the product and developing an API will help to grow the product in many senses.
```

The backup API provides a standardized and documented interface, making it easier for developers and customers to understand and implement backup functionalities for their Hosted Clusters. This not only accelerates the integration process but also encourages the development of a robust ecosystem around your product.

Contributes significantly to the reliability of the product by promoting seamless integration, automation, and standardization, ultimately providing users with a more dependable and user-friendly experience.

> The API will help on the disaster recovery duties, like Hosted Cluster migration or Hosted Cluster recovery, both highly demanding features by Red Hat customers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The API will help with disaster recovery duties, like Hosted Cluster migration or Hosted Cluster recovery, both highly demanded features by Red Hat customers.
```

### User Stories
- As a customer/engineer/service provider I want to have the ability to create etcd backups from my current hosted cluster using the Hosted Cluster API.
- As a customer/engineer/service provider I want to have the ability to restore etcd cluster in a new hosted cluster.

> - As a developer I want to to declaratively create etcd backups using and upload it to Amazon S3.
> - As a developer I want to to declaratively create etcd backups using and upload it to Azure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- As a developer I want to declaratively create etcd backups using and uploading them to Amazon S3.
- As a developer I want to declaratively create etcd backups using and uploading them to Azure.
```

> - As a customer I want to perform etcd backups of my Hosted Clusters in a concrete time window and schedule in the pace my bussiness needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- As a customer I want to perform etcd backups of my Hosted Clusters in a concrete time window and schedule at the pace my business needs.
```

**Integration:** Integration with the product is strengthened, meaning that adding new features becomes more straightforward. Employing tightly coupled methods could lead to poor practices.

**Alerting:** The controller can notify users through various channels:

- HC status.conditions
- Log entries
- Events
- Alerting
- Metrics

**Validations:** In this scenario, we incorporate an additional layer of validations (CEL), managed by api-machinery. This layer promptly detects any discrepancies with the API consensus and triggers early failure. Furthermore, additional validations can be employed within the controller.

**Reusability:** Leveraging the existing ETCD backup API developed by the ETCD team, we will integrate the entire API into a new structure within our ETCD API group. Within the same group, we will incorporate the necessary functionality to upload binaries to remote storage such as S3 or Azure.

#### Cons

**Supportability:** Development of the API and support of it during the product life-cycle.
**Complexity:** The Hosted Control Planes team will take the responsability to stay tuned over the API changes of the ETCD Backup.

## Proposal

> The proposal commences with the acknowledgment that a user requires an ETCD backup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The proposal commences with the acknowledgement that a user requires an ETCD backup.
```

The primary requirement is that the ETCD `managementType` must be configured as `managed`. Once this configuration is set, further progress can proceed.

This backup operation will be specified within the `hostedcluster.spec.etcd` API group under a new subgroup named `backup`. This subgroup will encompass two fields, with the primary one designated for the backup process itself, directly imported from the original ETCD Backup API. Comprehensive details regarding this API can be found in the official ETCD proposal and its corresponding implementation documentation.

- [ETCD Operator Backup API Design Doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1xBnK3D7MCblFgxQ8RUZFyWNIU_bnSFHciLhhHAeP0Xk/edit)
- [ETCD Backup API implementation](https://github.com/openshift/api/pull/1482)
- [Periodic Backup Controller](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-etcd-operator/pull/1074)

The other field it's called `storeEndpoint` which basically will take care of the export of the binary to an external endpoint. This endpoint could be S3, Azure, etc.... Inside of this `storeEndpoint` we have some fields:

> - **BackupPrefix:** Where the user could set somekind of prefix to identy that backup in a more readable way. This Prefix will be parsed, validated and used in the final name which will contain the **timestamp**, the **HostedCluster name** and the provided **BackupPrefix**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **BackupPrefix:** Where the user could set some kind of prefix to identify that backup in a more readable way. This Prefix will be parsed, validated and used in the final name which will contain the **timestamp**, the **HostedCluster name** and the provided **BackupPrefix**.
```

> - **Credentials:** This is a `SecretReference` located in the HostedCluster namespace using the same name as the backup plus the "credetials" suffix

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Credentials:** This is a `SecretReference` located in the HostedCluster namespace using the same name as the backup plus the "credentials" suffix
```

        retentionPolicy:
          retentionType: RetentionNumber
          retentionNumber:
            maxNumberOfBackups: 10
      storeEndpoint:
        backupPrefix: "pre-upgrade"
        credentials:
          name: "s3-backup-credentials"
        serviceConfig:
          serviceURL: "s3://hc-sample-us-east-1"
          region: "us-east"
          tags:
          - "hostedcluster=hc-sample"
          - "foo=bar"
...
```

Upon introducing this new configuration to the Hosted Cluster, we will undergo the initial layer of validations using CEL with the api-machinery. This step ensures that the user has configured the settings correctly.

Once this initial validation is successful, the subsequent components responsible for taking action are the `ETCDBackupController` and `ETCDUploadController`. These controllers will then proceed with their respective tasks based on the validated configuration.

The behaviour of both controllers will be detailed in the next section. The backup and upload process finishes once the HC is labeled accordingly and the controllers will omit the reconciliation on those HC which the backup are up to date.

#### Restoration

> During the restoration process we need to create a new HostedCluster and we need to follow the current restoration process. This process relies in the addition oc the `hostedcluster.spec.etcd.managed.storage.restoreSnapshotURL` field. This should point to the resultant URL of the backup process done before.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the restoration process we need to create a new HostedCluster and we need to follow the current restoration process. This process relies on the addition of the `hostedcluster.spec.etcd.managed.storage.restoreSnapshotURL` field. This should point to the resultant URL of the backup process done before.
```

```

```mermaid
graph TB

subgraph ETCD Backup Upload Process
  PushBackupToRemote --> checkUpload{Is the backup<br> uploaded?}
  checkUpload --> y1(Yes) --> c1(Continue)
  checkUpload --> n1(No) --> f1(Finish Error)
  f1 --> retryPolicy
  f1 --> r1(Report)

  GarbageCollector --> checkOldBackupsInRemote{"It's there<br> old backups<br>in remote?"}
  checkOldBackupsInRemote --> n4(No) --> f3(Finish Success) --> r1
  checkOldBackupsInRemote --> y4(Yes) --> checkGCRemoteJob{"[TBD]<br>It's there a<br> Remote GC Job"}
  checkGCRemoteJob --> y5(Yes) --> c4(Continue)
  checkGCRemoteJob --> n5(No) --> d2(Deploy Remote GC Job) --> c4

  LabelResources(Label HostedCluster) --> addLabelHCName(Add backup label: Name)
  addLabelHCName --> e1{Exists<br>Labels?}

  LabelResources --> addLabelHCTime(Add backup label: Timestamp)
  addLabelHCTime --> e1
  e1 --> CreateOrUpdateLabels
  CreateOrUpdateLabels --> LabelsInSync{Labels <br>In Sync?}
  LabelsInSync --> y6(Yes) --> Report
  LabelsInSync --> n6(No) --> syncHCPLabels(Sync Labels to HCP)
  syncHCPLabels --> e1

  retryPolicy --Go back--> Pre-Validations

  Report
end
```

## Open Questions

- Do we need a retryPolicy for the failure processes?

> - The Garbage colector will also clean the remote backups?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The Garbage collector will also clean the remote backups?
```

## Test Plan

### Unit Testing

Like any other component, every part of the controller that makes sense to be tested will include unit testing.

### Conformance Testing

Each of the controllers, `ETCDBackupController`, and `ETCDUploadController`, will have its own section to test the behavior of each aspect.

For `ETCDBackupController`:

- Test one-shot backup and validate
- Test scheduled backup and validate

For `ETCDUploadController`:

- Test one-shot backup, validate and upload
- Test scheduled backup, validate and upload

### E2E

For E2E testing, the plan is to develop tests covering the final backup functionality. Currently, tests are available only for AWS, which will be the first provider to be covered. Eventually, more providers will be included. For the Agent/Kubevirt providers, it is likely that we will use Minio or a similar service to mimic the S3 API.

## Graduation Criteria

- Maturity levels
  - `alpha`, `beta`, `stable` in upstream Hypershift
  - `Dev Preview`, `Tech Preview`, `GA` in OpenShift at functionality level.

> **If this is a user facing change requiring new or updated documentation in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/),
> please be sure to include in the graduation criteria.**
> 
> **Examples**: These are generalized examples to consider, in addition
> to the aforementioned [maturity levels][maturity-levels].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

The backup API provides a standardized and documented interface, making it easier for developers and customers to understand and implement backup functionalities for their Hosted Clusters. This not only accelerates the integration process but also encourages the development of a robust ecosystem around your product.

Contributes significantly to the reliability of the product by promoting seamless integration, automation, and standardization, ultimately providing users with a more dependable and user-friendly experience.

The API will help with disaster recovery duties, like Hosted Cluster migration or Hosted Cluster recovery, both highly demanded features by Red Hat customers.

### User Stories

- As a customer I want to perform etcd backups of my Hosted Clusters in a concrete time window and schedule at the pace my business needs.
- As a customer/engineer/service provider I want to have the ability to restore etcd cluster in a new hosted cluster.
- As a developer I want to declaratively create etcd backups using and upload it to Amazon S3.
- As a developer I want to declaratively create etcd backups using and upload it to Azure.

> - As a customer I want to perform etcd backups of my Hosted Clusters in a concrete time window and schedule in the pace my bussiness needs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- As a customer I want to perform etcd backups of my Hosted Clusters in a concrete time window and schedule in the pace my business needs.
```

> - As a customer I want to perform etcd backups of my Hosted Clusters in a concrete time window and schedule in the pace my bussiness needs.

Reviewer 2: What about agent, disconnected, and kubevirt HCs?

Author: Added a new use case. Thanks

  - Restoration of the backup in another Hosted Cluster using the already existent API.

### Non-Goals

- Provide a full backup/restoration solution for a hosted cluster.
  - This is not covering the Volumes migrations

### Pros and Cons
#### Pros

**Visibility:** Having an API could enhance visibility within the HostedCluster (HC) object, which serves as the primary interface for customers to manage backups. In the event of a backup failure, in addition to log entries, it could update the status.conditions within the HostedCluster object.

**Integration:** Integration with the product is strengthened, meaning that adding new features becomes more straightforward. Employing tightly coupled methods could lead to poor practices.

**Alerting:** The controller can notify users through various channels:

- HC status.conditions
- Log entries
- Events
- Alerting
- Metrics

**Validations:** In this scenario, we incorporate an additional layer of validations (CEL), managed by api-machinery. This layer promptly detects any discrepancies with the API consensus and triggers early failure. Furthermore, additional validations can be employed within the controller.

> **Reusability:** Leveraging the existing ETCD backup API developed by the ETCD team, we will integrate the entire API into a new structure within our ETCD API group. Within the same group, we will incorporate the necessary functionality to upload binaries to remote storage such as S3 or Azure.

Reviewer 2: Does it always have to be remote storage? What would we do with agent, disconnected, kubevirt situations?

Author: Yes, the plan is to include some kind of block storage outside of this cluster (e.g: Minio or something similar) to be compatible with the S3 interface. This will cover the disconnected/bare metal providers.

Reviewer 3: > within our ETCD API group

We don't have an etcd API group

Reviewer 4: I would double-check with the field, but S3 is not very common on-prem.  Traditional on-prem is more likely to have NFS.

Author: The S3 will be implemented once the AWS case is covered so MinIO will be automatically supported. The plan is add new providers and NFS could be one of them but we need to prioritise the most used ones (ODF, NFS or w/e other) but I don't have enough data to say now which providers will be included in the initial approach. We can talk about this during the development and in the meantime capture this feedback.

#### Cons

**Supportability:** Development of the API and support of it during the product life-cycle.

> **Complexity:** The Hosted Control Planes team will take the responsability to stay tuned over the API changes of the ETCD Backup.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Complexity:** The Hosted Control Planes team will take the responsibility to stay tuned over the API changes of the ETCD Backup.
```

api-approvers:
  - "@csrwng"
  - "@enxebre"
  - "@sjenning"
  - "@derekwaynecarr"
  - "@imain"
  - "@bryan-cox"
  - "@jparrill"
  - "@muraee"
  - "@Patryk-Stefanski"
  - "@celebdor"

creation-date: 2024-02-01
last-updated: 2024-02-16

tracking-link:
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/HOSTEDCP-1370

see-also:
  - N/A
replaces:
  - N/A
superseded-by:
  - N/A
---

# Hosted Control Plane Etcd Backup API

## Summary

This proposal fleshes out the details for the new automated Etcd Backup API solution for Hosted Control Planes.

## Glossary

- HCP - Hosted Control Plane
- HC - Hosted Cluster
- PVC - Persistent Volume Claim
- PV - Persistent Volume

## Motivation

Hypershift now has a small interface to perform the etcd backups using the CLI. This solution is not fully integrated into the product and developing an API will help to grow the product in many senses.

The backup API provides a standardized and documented interface, making it easier for developers and customers to understand and implement backup functionalities for their Hosted Clusters. This not only accelerates the integration process but also encourages the development of a robust ecosystem around your product.

> Contributes significantly to the reliability of the product by promoting seamless integration, automation, and standardization, ultimately providing users with a more dependable and user-friendly experience.

Reviewer 3: s/Contributes/The backup API contributes/

The API will help with disaster recovery duties, like Hosted Cluster migration or Hosted Cluster recovery, both highly demanded features by Red Hat customers.

### User Stories

- As a customer I want to perform etcd backups of my Hosted Clusters in a concrete time window and schedule at the pace my bussiness needs.
- As a customer/engineer/service provider I want to have the ability to restore etcd cluster in a new hosted cluster.

> - As a developer I want to declaratively create etcd backups using and upload it to Amazon S3.

Reviewer 3: s/create etcd backups using and upload it/create etcd backups and upload them/

> - As a developer I want to declaratively create etcd backups using and upload it to Azure.

Reviewer 3: s/create etcd backups using and upload it/create etcd backups and upload them/

> - As a developer I want to declaratively create etcd backups using and upload it to an S3 like disconnected block storage platform for Agent and Kubevirt providers.

Reviewer 3: s/create etcd backups using and upload it/create etcd backups and upload them/

> - As a customer I want to perform etcd backups of my Hosted Clusters in a concrete time window and schedule in the pace my bussiness needs.

Reviewer 3: s/schedule in the pace/schedule at the pace/

- As a customer I want documentation about how to perform the backup and recovery procedures in my Hosted Cluster.

### Goals

- Provide a consumable API for Etcd backup that could be usable in a Hosted Cluster restoration scenario. These are the features included:
  - Schedulable.
  - Capability to select the right Time Zone.
  - Retention policy based on size of the backup or number of backups.
  - Local storage of the backup (PVCs).
  - Remote storage of the backup in a service provider (S3, Azure...).
  - Restoration of the backup in another Hosted Cluster using the already existent API.

### Non-Goals

> - Provide a full backup/restoration solution for a hosted cluster.

Author: I don't think so. The CRDs are registered in the ETCD DB so those will be restored in the destination after the process. The only pain point is regarding to Volumes and their content.

> - Provide a full backup/restoration solution for a hosted cluster.

Reviewer 4: Great.  Can you please clarify it in the text?  Maybe just "Provide a backup/restoration solution for a hosted cluster's volumes"?

**Alerting:** The controller can notify users through various channels:

- HC status.conditions
- Log entries
- Events
- Alerting
- Metrics

**Validations:** In this scenario, we incorporate an additional layer of validations (CEL), managed by api-machinery. This layer promptly detects any discrepancies with the API consensus and triggers early failure. Furthermore, additional validations can be employed within the controller.

**Reusability:** Leveraging the existing ETCD backup API developed by the ETCD team, we will integrate the entire API into a new structure within our ETCD API group. Within the same group, we will incorporate the necessary functionality to upload binaries to remote storage such as S3 or Azure.

#### Cons

**Supportability:** Development of the API and support of it during the product life-cycle.
**Complexity:** The Hosted Control Planes team will take the responsibility to stay tuned over the API changes of the ETCD Backup.

## Proposal

The proposal commences with the acknowledgement that a user requires an ETCD backup.

> The primary requirement is that the ETCD `managementType` must be configured as `managed`. Once this configuration is set, further progress can proceed.

Reviewer 3: s/Once this configuration is set, further progress can proceed.//

> This backup operation will be specified within the `hostedcluster.spec.etcd` API group under a new subgroup named `backup`. This subgroup will encompass two fields, with the primary one designated for the backup process itself, directly imported from the original ETCD Backup API. Comprehensive details regarding this API can be found in the official ETCD proposal and its corresponding implementation documentation.

Reviewer 5: I don't think the terms API group and subgroup is correctly used here. we only have one API group `hypershift.openshift.io`.

`hostedcluster.spec.etcd` is just a field within the HostedCluster kind.

> This backup operation will be specified within the `hostedcluster.spec.etcd` API group under a new subgroup named `backup`. This subgroup will encompass two fields, with the primary one designated for the backup process itself, directly imported from the original ETCD Backup API. Comprehensive details regarding this API can be found in the official ETCD proposal and its corresponding implementation documentation.

Reviewer 4: The goal of this enhancement wasn't clear until this point in the doc, where, as I understand it, you want to integrate the existing etcd backup API into the hosted cluster API.

I'm not familiar with the current HCP backup solution, but from what I gather, the first sentence of the enhancement should be something like:
Many HCP customers require an etcd backup solution, which we currently provide by having the HCP CLI use the existing etcd backup API (link).  However, this loose integration leads to a poor user experience.  We propose a tighter integration by incorporating etcd backup into the HC API.  This way, HCP can perform needed integration while using the existing etcd backup API to perform the heavy lifing.

- [ETCD Operator Backup API Design Doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1xBnK3D7MCblFgxQ8RUZFyWNIU_bnSFHciLhhHAeP0Xk/edit)
- [ETCD Backup API implementation](https://github.com/openshift/api/pull/1482)
- [Periodic Backup Controller](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-etcd-operator/pull/1074)

> The other field it's called `storeEndpoint` which basically will take care of the export of the binary to an external endpoint. This endpoint could be S3, Azure, etc.... Inside of this `storeEndpoint` we have some fields:

Reviewer 3: s/other field it's called/other field is called/

Reviewer 3: > export of the binary...

Maybe we can use better wording here. Binary to me implies code and not backup data.

> The other field it's called `storeEndpoint` which basically will take care of the export of the binary to an external endpoint. This endpoint could be S3, Azure, etc.... Inside of this `storeEndpoint` we have some fields:

Reviewer 4: Which other field?  Other than what?

Author: The 2 fields are `Backup` and `StoreEndpoint`.

- **BackupPrefix:** Where the user could set some kind of prefix to identify that backup in a more readable way. This Prefix will be parsed, validated and used in the final name which will contain the **timestamp**, the **HostedCluster name** and the provided **BackupPrefix**.

> - **Credentials:** This is a `SecretReference` located in the HostedCluster namespace using the same name as the backup plus the "credentials" suffix

Reviewer 3: > using the same name as the backup plus the "credentials" suffix

If we have a convention for the name, why specify it in the API? If not, then the name should be allowed to be anything.

Author: I was thinking in some scenarios:

- You are on-premise and you don't have any S3 credentials stored.
- You are in AWS but wanna save the backup in the Azure cloud
- You are on-premise but you wanna upload the backup to S3

In these scenarios the user will need to create the secret in the HC namespace. Maybe we can specify a fixed name like `<HC Name>-backup-credentials`. WDYT?

- **ServiceConfig:** This ServiceConfig field is another struct which it will contain the details about the remote destination you will upload that backup.

> 

Reviewer 3: To me, it would be more useful if the new API is presented as a go struct with comments for the fields

Author: Not sure I'm following, could you elaborate that?

Author: Makes sense.

The `ServiceConfig` struct will be the same on each provider. The plan is to provide a common interface and modify the behaviour depending on the destination provider.

- **ServiceURL:** Points to the URL necessary to upload the binary.
- **Region:** This will set the Region for the destination bucket.
- **Tags:** Necessary tags to label the backup in he destination resources.

### Workflow Description

#### Backup

> When a user with a HostedCluster intends to perform a backup, the initial step involves modifying the HostedCluster by introducing a new field within the etcd API group. This new field will serve to incorporate the required parameters and configurations essential for executing backup operations seamlessly within the HostedCluster environment.

Reviewer 5: > by introducing a new field within the ~~etcd API group~~. 
same comment as above

```yaml
...
spec:
  controllerAvailabilityPolicy: SingleReplica
  dns:
    baseDomain: hypershiftbm.lab
  etcd:
    managed:
      storage:
        persistentVolume:
          size: 8Gi
        restoreSnapshotURL: null
        type: PersistentVolume
    managementType: Managed

>     backup:

Reviewer 3: why not specify the backup inside the `managed` struct?

Author: Makes sense.

      etcdBackup:

>         timeZone: "UTC"

Author: Ohh forgot to put the `schedule` field in the sample:

```
Schedule defines the recurring backup schedule in Cron format every 2 hours: 0 */2 * * * every day at 3am: 0 3 * * * Empty string means no opinion and the platform is left to choose a reasonable default which is subject to change without notice.

"no backups" string will be the signal to not schedule backups and initially will be the default value.
```

>         pvcName: "pre-upgrade-backup"

Reviewer 6: do we really need a pvc name to be supplied? why not autogenerate PVC names instead?

Author: I don't think it's a mandatory field, but in my experience with customers they like to differentiate special backup pre-events (e.g pre migrations). So I think will be useful for them, but most of the backups will be created with a self-generated name.

Reviewer 7: Allowing this to be user-configurable might have some value - can we clarify a concrete user story for this?

If we have this field, we also need to consider the behavior when some other content exists already in the PV? Generating the values lets us ignore the possibility of a collision.

Reviewer 7: disregard, we are just embedding the OCP `config.openshift.io/v1alpha1:Backup` resource.

        retentionPolicy:
          retentionType: RetentionNumber
          retentionNumber:
            maxNumberOfBackups: 10
      storeEndpoint:
        backupPrefix: "pre-upgrade"
        credentials:
          name: "s3-backup-credentials"
        serviceConfig:
          serviceURL: "s3://hc-sample-us-east-1"
          region: "us-east"
          tags:

>           - "hostedcluster=hc-sample"
>           - "foo=bar"

Reviewer 5: this should be a map
```suggestion
          - hostedcluster: hc-sample
          - foo: bar
```

Reviewer 3: We should avoid using maps in the API, but definitely should have a structure (see pod.spec.env)

Author: I was thinking in a slice with key=value, not a map actually.

>           - "foo=bar"

Reviewer 6: I think this storageEndpoint might need a `type` associated with it to differentiate between different types of object storage.  Right now the api looks very aws S3 specific, which might not allow us to transition to something like cosi easily in the future.

Author: Yep, agree. I was thinking in the same approach we have for hypershift providers. Match with the type and describe the type. Makes sense, let me modify the enhancement in that sense.

...
```

Upon introducing this new configuration to the Hosted Cluster, we will undergo the initial layer of validations using CEL with the api-machinery. This step ensures that the user has configured the settings correctly.

Once this initial validation is successful, the subsequent components responsible for taking action are the `ETCDBackupController` and `ETCDUploadController`. These controllers will then proceed with their respective tasks based on the validated configuration.

> 

Reviewer 5: Can we talk about the benefits of introducing new Controllers vs using CronJobs

Author: Yep, I've put this in the design doc: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1o8DSo6nUNOBgrAbgF2nZ5RpUtuZPX_7pzD1-et0KadI/edit#heading=h.9a8gdebqfwzi

	  RetentionNumber(RetentionNumber) --> MaxNumberOfBackups("MaxNumberOfBackups --int--")
	  RetentionType(RetentionType) --> RetentionSize(RetentionSize)
	  RetentionSize(RetentionSize) --> MaxSizeOfBackupsGb("MaxSizeOfBackupsGb --int--")
  end

  subgraph StorageEndpoint
	  StoreEndpoint(*hyperv1.storeEndpoint) --> BackupPrefix("BackupPrefix --string--")
	  StoreEndpoint(*hyperv1.storeEndpoint) --> Service("ServiceConfig --ServiceConfig--")
	  StoreEndpoint(*hyperv1.storeEndpoint) --> Credentials("Credentials --SecretRef--")

    Service --> ServiceURL("ServiceURL --string--")
    Service --> Region("Region --string--")
    Service --> Tags("Tags --slice--")
  end
end
```

### Topology Considerations

#### Hypershift / Hosted Control Planes

This is implemented directly for Hypershift.

#### Standalone Clusters

N/A

#### Single-node Deployments or MicroShift

**SNO:** The ETCD backup API and Controllers will work in the same way having 1-N nodes.
**Microshift:** N/A

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

In this section we will dissect the behaviour of the different controller to be implemented.

#### ETCDBackupController

> - The `ETCDBackupController` initiates with a series of validations:

Reviewer 4: HC version match?

Author: Nice point!

  - Checks if the backup has already been performed by examining the HC and HCP labels (further details provided at the end of the process).
  - Validates access permissions to the PVC and available free space. Errors in either could result in log entries, a new status.condition for the HC and HCP, and an event.
  - Verifies the existence and health status of the HostedCluster necessary for performing the backup, as well as the presence of the PVC.
  - If the PVC does not exist, the controller creates it and reschedules the backup for the next iteration, awaiting the status of Bound. If binding fails after a certain period, the controller will abandon the backup attempt and mark it as a failure.
  - If the PVC already exists, the controller checks for another backup with the same final name. If found, it completes the process and updates the status.conditions of the HC and HCP accordingly.

>   - If the backup does not exist, the backup procedure proceeds.

Reviewer 6: I'm not completely clear on how this PVC is being used. Looking at the flow here, it appears that there's a 1:many relationship between PVCs and Backups. meaning PVC is used over and over for backups.

if that's the case, why not make a 1:1 relationship to PVCs and backups, and use the labels/annotations on the PVC to help guide the retention policies for the backup within the cluster.

for example, every backup would result in a new PVC, we'd write an annotation on the PVC outlining when it expired, then garbage collection can be handled at the k8s resource level.

Author: Makes sense. This will save some computing resources. I've modified the enhancement in that way. Thanks

- Like other endpoints in Hypershift, the inputs are restricted by the defined types:
  - Enums are limited to the types defined in the code.
  - Strings are restricted to a defined number of characters via OpenAPI.
  - Integers are defined by the Go language.
- All mentioned endpoints require authentication.
- The backup performed is encrypted by default using the key generated for that ETCD cluster.
- The permissions of the provided credentials could be very limited, only allowing for pushing the backup binary to a specific S3 bucket. Listing, modifying, or similar actions are not necessary.
- This new component has not yet undergone DUST testing or penetration testing.

**How will security be reviewed and by whom?**

From RH Security team

- David Sastre (@dawud) (Security Architect dedicated to Hypershift)
- Florencio Cano (Backup)

From the internal team:

- @derekwaynecarr
- @csrwng
- @enxebre

**How will UX be reviewed and by whom?**

- @hypershift-team

### Drawbacks

N/A

## Open Questions

- Do we need a retryPolicy for the failure processes?

> - The Garbage collector will also clean the remote backups?

Reviewer 6: That might not be necessary. object stores like s3 usually have retention policies.

Author: Makes sense. I will keep this on hold until a customer would needed at some point :). Thanks for the feedback.

- Could the use of backups affect performance at scale, with 80 HostedClusters performing backups simultaneously?

## Test Plan

### Unit Testing

Like any other component, every part of the controller that makes sense to be tested will include unit testing.

### Conformance Testing

Each of the controllers, `ETCDBackupController`, and `ETCDUploadController`, will have its own section to test the behavior of each aspect.

For `ETCDBackupController`:

- Test one-shot backup and validate
- Test scheduled backup and validate

For `ETCDUploadController`:

- Test one-shot backup, validate and upload

> - Test scheduled backup, validate and upload

Reviewer 6: i see a lot of backup validation here but no restore validation.

i'm not sure how much confidence we can gain here without exercising restore as well.

Author: The only think I can think of is to validate the ETCD cluster status after restoration. using the command `etcdctl endpoint health --cluster` it returns the cluster status + a validation checksum. We can store this validation checksum as an annotation, status in the HostedCluster or maybe in the backup name.

After restoration we can validate if the health check of the restored ETCD cluster matches with this checksum.

Makes sense?

If that so I will append this to the design. Thanks for the feedback

### E2E

> For E2E testing, the plan is to develop tests covering the final backup functionality. Currently, tests are available only for AWS, which will be the first provider to be covered. Eventually, more providers will be included. For the Agent/Kubevirt providers, it is likely that we will use Minio or a similar service to mimic the S3 API.

Reviewer 6: i believe ODF has an object storage solution

Author: Yep in the past it was called Nooba, i think it's still there and it allow block storage. I think for the first iteration we can keep a MinIO approach because in the end it uses S3 like API. And focus in a possible approach for ODF block storage API.

The backup API provides a standardized and documented interface, making it easier for developers and customers to understand and implement backup functionalities for their Hosted Clusters. This not only accelerates the integration process but also encourages the development of a robust ecosystem around /MCE/HostedControlPlanes customers.

The backup API contributes significantly to the reliability of the product by promoting seamless integration, automation, and standardization, ultimately providing users with a more dependable and user-friendly experience.

The API will help with disaster recovery duties, like Hosted Cluster migration or Hosted Cluster recovery, both highly demanded features by Red Hat customers.

### User Stories

- As a customer I want to perform etcd backups of my Hosted Clusters in a concrete time window and schedule at the pace my bussiness needs.

> - As a customer/engineer/service provider I want to have the ability to restore etcd cluster in a new hosted cluster.

Author: The difference basically is that the new HostedCluster could live in another separated management cluster.

> - As a developer I want to declaratively create etcd backups and upload them to Amazon S3.

Author: No, I don't think so. The plan there is follow the ETCD Backup API principles which cover this section.

- As a developer I want to declaratively create etcd backups and upload them to Azure.
- As a developer I want to declaratively create etcd backups and upload them to an S3 like disconnected block storage platform for Agent and Kubevirt providers.

> - As a customer I want to perform etcd backups of my Hosted Clusters in a concrete time window and schedule at the pace my bussiness needs.

Author: This covers scheduled timeframes.

- As a customer I want documentation about how to perform the backup and recovery procedures in my Hosted Cluster.

> - As a customer I want to restore a ETCD backup with the enough confidence that the new ETCD cluster will contain the same as the moment when I did the backup.

Author: Validation pre-restore with the checksum.

#### Cons

**Supportability:** Development of the API and support of it during the product life-cycle.
**Complexity:** The Hosted Control Planes team will take the responsibility to stay tuned over the API changes of the ETCD Backup.

## Proposal

The proposal commences with the acknowledgement that a user requires an ETCD backup.

The primary requirement is that the ETCD `managementType` must be configured as `managed`.

This backup operation will be specified within the `hostedcluster.spec.etcd.managed` API custom field under a new field named `backup`. This new field will encompass two childs, with the primary one designated for the backup process itself, directly imported from the original ETCD Backup API. Comprehensive details regarding this API can be found in the official ETCD proposal and its corresponding implementation documentation.

- [ETCD Operator Backup API Design Doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1xBnK3D7MCblFgxQ8RUZFyWNIU_bnSFHciLhhHAeP0Xk/edit)
- [ETCD Backup API implementation](https://github.com/openshift/api/pull/1482)
- [Periodic Backup Controller](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-etcd-operator/pull/1074)

> The other field is called `storeEndpoint` which basically will take care of the export of the backup object to an external endpoint. This endpoint could be S3, Azure, etc.... Inside of this `storeEndpoint` we have some fields:

Reviewer 7: Naively I would expect a field like `storeEndpoint` to hold a URI or similar - this field holds configuration for off-cluster storage, though, so, perhaps we can call it `externalStorage`?

Author: I've been discussing this with Adel already. For now I think we can keep this, and then modify the names (if make sense) in the final implementation.

Reviewer 8: I agree with changing the name now or later. I'm sure we can get a more accurate name

- **BackupPrefix:** Where the user could set some kind of prefix to identify that backup in a more readable way. This Prefix will be parsed, validated and used in the final name which will contain the **timestamp**, the **HostedCluster name** and the provided **BackupPrefix**.

> - **Credentials:** This is a `SecretReference` located in the HostedCluster namespace using the same name as the backup plus the "credentials" suffix.

Reviewer 7: If the user specifies a reference to credentials, let's use it verbatim instead of adding some suffix to it.

Author: I was thinking in that also, but I've think in a corner case when the customer has an already existent cred file which is used by other hosted cluster in the same NS, and looks like a limitation from our side if cannot differentiate among both.

> - **ServiceConfigType:** This is a enum field which will reference the remote cloud providers to upload the backup object (e.g s3, azure, odf).

Reviewer 7: If we enforce that exactly one of the provider-specific configurations is set, I don't think we need another field to identify which provider is being used.

Author: That remarks the data type with an enum, the other is the spec. Sample:

- Data Type: https://github.com/openshift/hypershift/blob/182a25c6e3bee420cfcfbfda3dc53bd00394f8e0/api/hypershift/v1beta1/hostedcluster_types.go#L1691
- Spec: https://github.com/openshift/hypershift/blob/182a25c6e3bee420cfcfbfda3dc53bd00394f8e0/api/hypershift/v1beta1/hostedcluster_types.go#L1727-L1730

Each provider struct will be different and for the initial development we will focus on S3 because it could cover AWS and on-premises (MinIO) storage.

- `s3ServiceConfig`:
  - **ServiceURL:** Points to the URL necessary to upload the object.
  - **Region:** This will set the Region for the destination bucket.
  - **Tags:** Necessary tags to label the backup in he destination resources.

### Workflow Description

#### Backup

When a user with a HostedCluster intends to perform a backup, the initial step involves modifying the HostedCluster by introducing a new field within the etcd API field. This new field will serve to incorporate the required parameters and configurations essential for executing backup operations seamlessly within the HostedCluster environment.

```yaml
...
spec:
  controllerAvailabilityPolicy: SingleReplica
  dns:
    baseDomain: hypershiftbm.lab
  etcd:
    managed:
      storage:
        persistentVolume:
          size: 8Gi
        restoreSnapshotURL: null
        type: PersistentVolume
    managementType: Managed
    backup:
      etcdBackup:

>         timeZone: "UTC"

Reviewer 7: Why do we want to expose a timezone here? If we always expect the crontab to be in UTC we sufficiently expose every possible schedule, right? 

It is not clear to me what the time zone field does when the schedule is something like `@weekly` as in the current example. What would a user expect when they have `@weekly` and change the timezone from CET to PST?

Reviewer 7: disregard, we are just embedding the OCP `config.openshift.io/v1alpha1:Backup` resource.

  - Checks if the backup has already been performed by examining the HC and HCP labels (further details provided at the end of the process).
  - Validates access permissions to the PVC and available free space. Errors in either could result in log entries, a new status.condition for the HC and HCP, and an event.
  - Verifies the existence and health status of the HostedCluster necessary for performing the backup, as well as the presence of the PVC.
  - The controller creates a new PVC per backup and reschedules the backup for the next iteration, awaiting the status of Bound. This PVC will have a label to be identified as the new vessel for the backup (this label will be deleted later). (1 PVC per backup)
    - If the PVC binding fails after a certain period, the controller will abandon the backup attempt and mark it as a failure.
    - If the PVC it's bound to a PV and contains the label/annotation for "new backup", the controller will trigger the backup process.
    - If the PVC it's bound to a PV and contains the label/annotation for "hash validation", the controller will perform a process to validate the existant backup.
    - TBD: valorate to include a retryPolicy

> - The controller initiates the backup process by generating the ETCD backup object in the PVC specified in the manifest.

Reviewer 7: I'd like to see a little more information about what we're expecting this controller to do - are we doing the backup in the controller process?

Reviewer 7: Hm, are we saying that this controller creates the `config.openshift.io/v1alpha1:Backup` resource? If so, that resource already has the schedule built in. Why are we needing to do timing checks in our controller? Please clarify the separation of concerns here.

Author: This process generates the backup binary object that will be uploaded to the proper destination. The inner process is not 100% clear to me but basically it uses the `etcdctl` to create a backup.

  validationHasEnoughFreeSpace --> y4("Yes") --> c4("continue")
  validationHasEnoughFreeSpace --> n4("No") --> f4(Finish Error)

  PV --> validationHasWritePermissions{Has Write<br>Permissions?}
  validationHasWritePermissions --> y5("Yes") --> c5("continue")
  validationHasWritePermissions --> n5("No") --> f5(Finish Error)

  f4 --> retryPolicy
  f5 --> retryPolicy
  retryPolicy --Go back--> Validations
end
```

```mermaid
graph TB
subgraph ETCD Backup Process
  mainBackupProcess(BackupProcess) --> sched{IsScheduled?}
  sched{IsScheduled?} --> n5("No") --> rb1(RunBackup)
  sched{IsScheduled?} --> y5("Yes") --> BackupRun{Should I<br>RunBackup?}
  BackupRun --> y6("Yes") --> rb1
  BackupRun --> n6("No") --> r5{Requeue}
  r5{Requeue} --Go back--> BackupProcess

  RunBackup -->  RunBackupCommand
  RunBackupCommand --> validateBackup{BackupOk?}
  s5 --> label1(Remove NewBackup<br>Label/Annotation on PVC)
  s5 --> label2(Add ValidationBackup<br>Label/Annotation on PVC)
  validateBackup --> y7("Yes") --> s5(Finish Success) --> SetStatus
  validateBackup --> n7("No") --> f5(Finish Error) --> SetStatus
  f5 --> retryPolicy --Go Back--> Validations
end
```

> #### ETCDUploadController

Reviewer 7: Could this be a generic component that watches `config.openshift.io/v1alpha1:Backup` resources - if we extend their spec to do uploads - and works for OCP core?

Author: I prefer to keep both controllers separated in functionality, maybe we can signal something among them to trigger different events.
